Dev.g2p (#10)
MotherTongues/mothertongues-blog: _posts/2020-08-07-g2p.md

image: assets/images/bonjour-g2p.png
description: "How to get from 'a' to 'b' using the g2p library"
featured: false
hidden: false
---

> This blog post describes the background context for a software tool called `g2p` which is shorthand for 'Grapheme-to-Phoneme', but if you don't know those terms, don't worry, this post will explain it. Essentially, `g2p` is a tool for systematically converting certain characters[^1] into other ones. Common use cases include converting between a [writing system and the phonetic alphabet](#use-case-1-getting-the-pronunciation-from-a-words-spelling), between two [writing systems for the same language](#use-case-2-a-language-with-multiple-writing-systems), or between a legacy ['font-hacked' writing system and its current Unicode-supported version](#use-case-3-converting-from-legacy-writing-systems).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This blog post describes the background context for a software tool called `g2p`. `g2p` is a tool for systematically converting certain characters[^1] into other ones. Common use cases include converting between a [writing system and the phonetic alphabet](#use-case-1-getting-the-pronunciation-from-a-words-spelling), between two [writing systems for the same language](#use-case-2-a-language-with-multiple-writing-systems), or between a legacy ['font-hacked' writing system and its current Unicode-supported version](#use-case-3-converting-from-legacy-writing-systems).
```

"grapheme-to-phoneme" is explained later.

> # What you need to know to understand this post

Reviewer 2: Period at the end of the next sentence.
```
- To understand the advanced section, you will need to know some [Python](https://www.python.org/).
```

Author: I don't usually add periods to single-sentence bullet points

Reviewer 2: I learned to put a period when the bullet contains a complete sentence, and only leave it out otherwise, but I don't feel strongly about it.

Author: ok cool, that makes sense, I'll probably still leave it like it is though hehe 😝

> 

Reviewer: The reader will also have to be familar with the command line (e.g., using `pip` to install things); they will need to be comfortable editing/creating JSON files, YAML files, and CSV/TSV/PSV files.

Author: Good point. Because I'm going to be splitting this up into multiple posts, I think I'll just leave it as-is for now and adjust that section for each post.

# What are the motivations behind G2P?

> There are many reasons why you might want to systematically convert between different characters. Here are a few possible use cases:

Reviewer: The "movtivation" part of this blog post series should really make the reader feel like, by learning g2p, they can be awesome! They can create a readalong! They can solve their community's font-hack problem! They can create orthography converters! etc.

Author: Totally! This is a bit dry, I'll adjust this in the new blog posts

### Use Case #1: Getting the pronunciation from a word's spelling

Sometimes you want to convert between a language's writing system (also known as *orthography*) and its pronunciation. "Letters" in a writing system are usually referred to as "graphemes" and their corresponding meaningful sounds are referred to as "phonemes"; hence "g2p" or "grapheme-to-phoneme". 

It gets a little more complicated than that though, because sometimes a grapheme is made of more than one character, as with the *digraph* "th" which can be pronounced *[unvoiced](https://www.thoughtco.com/voiced-and-voiceless-consonants-1212092#:~:text=Voiceless%20consonants%20do%20not%20use,as%20in%20%22thing%22)* as in 'thin' or *[voiced](https://www.thoughtco.com/voiced-and-voiceless-consonants-1212092#:~:text=Voiced%20Consonants,-Your%20vocal%20cords&text=As%20you%20pronounce%20a%20letter,W%2C%20Y%2C%20and%20Z.)* as in 'that'.

> The [International Phonetic Alphabet](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_Phonetic_Alphabet) is not so ambiguous, and writes the 'th' in 'thin' as **θ** and the 'th' in 'that' as **ð**. Knowing how to convert between the written and spoken form of a language is useful in a variety of computational tasks, but I will describe the usefulness specifically with a project called "ReadAlongs" [below](#readalongs).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [International Phonetic Alphabet](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_Phonetic_Alphabet) (IPA) is not so ambiguous! In IPA, the 'th' in 'thin' is written as **θ** and the 'th' in 'that' is written as **ð**. Knowing how to convert between the written and spoken form of a language is useful in a variety of computational tasks, but I will describe the usefulness specifically with a project called "ReadAlongs" [below](#readalongs).
```

### Use Case #3: Converting from legacy writing systems

> Some languages historically used 'font hacks' to render the characters in their writing system before they were supported standardly on computers. There's a longer discussion to be had here, but the Coles notes version is that when computers were gaining wide-spread use among speakers of Indigenous languages, they weren't typically able to *render* (ie display) characters outside of the 128 characters supported by the [American Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ASCII). To get around this, language communities would come up with their own custom fonts (often referred to as 'font hacks' or 'font encodings') where they would render characters like '©' which existed in ASCII as 'ǧ' instead (example taken from the Heiltsuk Doulos font). For more information on this topic, please check out ['Seeing the Heiltsuk Orthography from Font Encoding through to Unicode'](http://aidanpine.ca/static/cv/pdfs/Pine-Turin-Convertextract-2018.pdf) or ['Applications and innovations in typeface design for North American Indigenous languages'](https://markturin.sites.olt.ubc.ca/files/2020/06/Schillo_Turin_typeface_2020.pdf).

Reviewer 2: Note quite accurate: font hacks are over 8-bit characters, not the 7-bit ASCII characters. The example (©) is outside the ASCII range, and represents © in iso-8859-1, but not in ASCII.  Maybe just say "or in its standard 256 character extensions"?

Reviewer 2: Most importantly, don't say that © existed in ASCII, since it didn't.

Author: Thanks for this Eric, you're right that I skirt over the fact that © is part of the Latin 1 extension. I'm not sure that is needed here though. You're right that saying U+00A9 existed in (non-extended) 7 bit ASCII is wrong, but I also feel like going into extensions is maybe too much detail? Should I skip over talking about ASCII and instead talk about ASCII + Latin 1 from the start?

Reviewer 2: It's not worth a lot of words in the blog post, but I think it should be accurate. Just "ASCII + Latin 1" from the start would do, or anything similarly concise. What you don't want is a reader like me getting to this point and thinking "this guy doesn't know what he's talking about, I'm not sure I can believe the rest".

Here's the simplest fix I can suggest that meets my suggested criteria, and only adds 9 words:

... characters outside of the 256 characters supported by the [American Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ASCII) and its extensions, such as Latin 1 for French. To get around this, language communities would come up with their own custom fonts (often referred to as 'font hacks' or 'font encodings') where they would render characters like '©', which existed in Latin 1, as 'ǧ' instead (example taken from the Heiltsuk Doulos font). ...

Reviewer: And include a link to https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO/IEC_8859-1 as well!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some languages historically used “font hacks” to render the characters in their writing system before they were supported on computers. There's a longer discussion to be had here, but the Coles notes version is that when computers were gaining widespread use among speakers of Indigenous languages, they weren't typically able to *render* (i.e., display) characters outside of the 128 characters supported by the [American Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ASCII) or even any of the extensions to ASCII that provide a totatl of 256 character (e.g., [Latin-1](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO/IEC_8859-1) for Western European languages). To get around this, language communities would come up with their own custom fonts (often referred to as “font hacks” or “font encodings”) where they would **override** the display of a characters like “©” which existed in Latin-1, as 'ǧ' instead (example taken from the Heiltsuk Doulos font). For more information on this topic, please check out ['Seeing the Heiltsuk Orthography from Font Encoding through to Unicode'](http://aidanpine.ca/static/cv/pdfs/Pine-Turin-Convertextract-2018.pdf) or ['Applications and innovations in typeface design for North American Indigenous languages'](https://markturin.sites.olt.ubc.ca/files/2020/06/Schillo_Turin_typeface_2020.pdf).
```

# How to get from 'a' to 'b' (or 'a' to 'æ') with g2p

> `g2p` is a Python library[^2] that helps you convert between different characters based on user-defined rules. The inspiration for how to write these rules was mostly taken from the notion of [phonological rewrite rules](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phonological_rule), which is a common way of describing 'multi-level' phonological changes in linguistics. What is meant by 'multilevel' is the idea that a word, like 'cats' or 'dogs' can have multiple 'levels' of representation. For example, you might think of the way that those words are written in English orthography (writing system) as one level. Then, you might think of a general pronunciation for those words, written in the phonetic alphabet, as another level. You could also separate that level into more than one level by having a level each for [narrow and broad transcriptions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phonetic_transcription#Narrow_versus_broad_transcription:~:text=orthography.-,Narrow%20versus%20broad%20transcription).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`g2p` is a Python library[^2] that helps you convert between different characters based on user-defined rules. The inspiration for how to write these rules was mostly taken from the notion of [phonological rewrite rules](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phonological_rule), which is a common way of describing *multilevel* phonological changes in linguistics. *Multilevel* changes is the idea that a word, like 'cats' or 'dogs' can have multiple 'levels' of representation. For example, you might think of the way that those words are written in English orthography (writing system) as one level. Then, you might think of a general pronunciation for those words, written in the phonetic alphabet, as another level. You could also separate that level into more than one level by having a level each for [narrow and broad transcriptions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phonetic_transcription#Narrow_versus_broad_transcription:~:text=orthography.-,Narrow%20versus%20broad%20transcription).
```

| Level Name |  Word #1   |  Word #2  | Word # 3 |
|---|---|---|---|
| Level 1 (orthography) | cat | dog | back |
| Level 2 (broad IPA) | kæt | dɑɡ | bæk |
| Level 3 (narrow IPA) | kʰæt | dɑɡ | bæk |

> Now, just by looking at these three levels, you can probably see some fairly systematic rules here that you could imagine would get you from one level to the next, even if you don't know the phonetic alphabet by-heart and even if you don't really know much about English phonology (sound patterns and systems).

Reviewer 2: by-heart -> by heart (no hyphen)

> First of all, a possible hypothesis would be that all 'a' characters in level one turn to 'æ', so we might want a rule to express that all instances of 'a' turn to /æ/. And, for another example, it looks like between levels 2 and 3, /k/ turns into either [k] or [kʰ] depending on whether it occurs before or after /æ/[^3]. So, with these hypotheses about the rules to transform from one level to another, how do we start translating this into rules for `g2p`?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One possible hypothesis would be that all 'a' characters in level one turn to 'æ', so we might want a rule to express that all instances of 'a' turn to /æ/. And, for another example, it looks like between levels 2 and 3, /k/ turns into either [k] or [kʰ] depending on whether it occurs before or after /æ/[^3]. So, with these hypotheses about the rules to transform from one level to another, how do we start translating this into rules for `g2p`?
```

## Basic Rule writing

> `g2p` lets you describe these patterns using an ordered list of rules. Each rule must be defined to have a sequence of one or more input characters and a sequence of zero or more output characters. We can define these rules in `g2p` either using a tabular spreadsheet format (csv) or using a format called JavaScript Object Notation or [JSON](https://www.json.org/json-en.html). To actually write these rules along with this blog post, I recommend getting some sort of text editor, like [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/). You could also write the spreadsheet-type rules in your favourite spreadsheet editor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`g2p` lets you describe these patterns using **an ordered series of rules**. Each rule must be defined to have a sequence of one or more input characters and a sequence of zero or more output characters. We can define these rules in `g2p` either using a tabular spreadsheet format (CSV) or using a format called JavaScript Object Notation or [JSON](https://www.json.org/json-en.html). To actually write these rules along with this blog post, I recommend getting some sort of text editor, like [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/). You could also write the spreadsheet-type rules in your favourite spreadsheet editor.
```

> For example, rules written in the tabular 'csv' format:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, rules written in the tabular comma-separated values (CSV) format:
```

]
```

Both of the above rules capture our first rule that turns an orthographic 'a' into a broad IPA /æ/. You can choose to write your rules in **either** format, although JSON will offer you slightly more flexibility when writing [advanced rules](#advanced-a-deeper-dive-into-writing-tricky-rules).

> If we want to write rules that depend on a particular context, we need a couple more columns (csv) or keys (JSON) than just `in` and `out`. This is where we use `context_before` and `context_after`. So, our second rule from above was to turn /k/ to [kʰ] when the character after /k/ is /æ/. Here, we could write the rules like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we want to write rules that depend on a particular context, we need a couple more columns (CSV) or keys (JSON) than just `in` and `out`. This is where we use `context_before` and `context_after`. So, our second rule from above was to turn /k/ to [kʰ] when the character after /k/ is /æ/. Here, we could write the rules like this:
```

]
```

> ## Ok, so how do I actually get these rules to do something?

Reviewer: After explaining the "why" in the previous text, I would make this section the start of a new post: "Creating your first g2p mapping". I'd like this to be a beginner-friendly tutorial, essentially, as its own standalone blog post!

Overall in this section, I'd like more examples of concrete rules, and how do I come up with a rule in the first place? How do I know when to make a rule?

So, you've understood the [basics of writing rules](#basic-rule-writing) either described above and you want to actually use them to convert something! This section describes exactly how to do that. 

The easiest way to write rules quickly is using the [G2P Studio](https://g2p-studio.herokuapp.com/) web application[^4]. Once landing on the G2P Studio page, you can scroll down to the [Custom Rules](https://g2p-studio.herokuapp.com/#out_delimiter-0:~:text=Custom%20Rules) section and start directly editing the spreadsheet available there. Below is a list of all the rules to capture the transformations between level 1 and level 2 above. There are some rules that we discussed in that section, and some others that might look unfamiliar. For a full description of some of these rules, have a look at the [advanced rule-writing section](#a-deeper-dive-into-writing-tricky-rules).

{% picture custom-rules-g2p-studio.png %}

> Once you have written your rules in this section, you can write some text in the left text-area at the top of the G2P Studio, and `g2p` will apply your rules and produce the output in the right text area as seen below:

Reviewer 2: remove hyphen in "left text-area"
```suggestion
Once you have written your rules in this section, you can write some text in the left text area at the top of the G2P Studio, and `g2p` will apply your rules and produce the output in the right text area as seen below:
```

{% picture custom-rules-output-g2p-studio.png %}

> You can also click on 'Export' under the Custom Rules section to export your rules to a csv file if you want to save them for later.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also click on 'Export' under the Custom Rules section to export your rules to a CSV file if you want to save them for later.
```

## Mapping configuration

> When you combine multiple rules in `g2p` for a particular purpose, this is called a *mapping*. In addition to each file containing your rules, you need a configuration file that tells `g2p` how to process your rules. We write mapping configurations in files titled `config.yaml`. The acronym corresponding to the 'yaml' file extension is 'Yet Another Markup Language' - which might be how you're feeling right now after having already learned about Comma Separated Value (csv) files and JavaScript Object Notation (JSON)!! Technically, neither of those last two are markup languages, and YAML itself has actually changed its acronym to "YAML Ain't a Markup Language" - but this waffling is the subject of a separate blog post :)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you combine multiple rules in `g2p` for a particular purpose, this is called a *mapping*. In addition to each file containing your rules, you need a configuration file that tells `g2p` how to process your rules. We write mapping configurations in files titled YAML file `config.yaml`. ".yaml" is the file extension for YAML which stands for 'Yet Another Markup Language' - which might be how you're feeling right now after having already learned about Comma Separated Value (CSV) files and JavaScript Object Notation (JSON)!!
```

I would just delete the waffling. Tech is weird ¯\\\_(ツ)\_/¯

Reviewer: It's worth mentioning that rules are different than mappings. A rule converts one sequence of text to a different sequence of text, applied conditionally depending on its surrounding context. A mapping is a collection of rules, with a certain configuration.

> In order to edit your yaml configuration file, you will need some sort of text editor, like [VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to edit your YAML configuration file, you will need some sort of text editor, like [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/). 
```

    mapping: eng_ipa_to_arpabet.json 
```

> If you're not familiar with yaml, and you're not just copy pasting from here, I recommend having a look at one of the many [tutorials](https://gettaurus.org/docs/YAMLTutorial/) on how to use yaml properly before attempting to write your own mapping configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're not familiar with YAML, and you're not just copy pasting from here, I recommend having a look at one of the many [tutorials](https://gettaurus.org/docs/YAMLTutorial/) on how to use YAML properly before attempting to write your own mapping configuration.
```

====

> ***PROPOSED END OF FIRST POST***

Reviewer 2: What's missing here and should be in the first post is where the heck are you supposed to place these files to have them used. It's in the later blog posts, but is there a way to make this first post a usable minimal working example? If not, put a forward pointer saying how to run these will come in a later post.

Author: Good point, I guess this is a reflection of me waffling a bit about whether I should include any of the yaml stuff in the first post at all. It might be easier to make the first post almost exclusively about writing rules in the G2P Studio. Then, a separate basic blog post for writing rules but on your computer with a clone of `g2p`, and then the other two blog posts later.

Reviewer 2: I like that idea. If you move the YAML discussion off to where you talk about working in a clone, then it makes sense. In the current version, the YAML stuff seems to come out of nowhere and it's not clear what to do with it, but in that alternate version it would hang together. That's my vote, if you're willing to do that extra work...

Reviewer: I concur with Eric, and I like your suggestion, Aidan!

====

## Advanced: A deeper dive into writing tricky rules

You may have noticed that the rules described above for converting words like 'dog' and 'cat' to IPA are woefully incomplete. The real world use cases for `g2p` often need to account for a lot more messiness than was described in the artificial example above. In fact, for languages like English, `g2p` is likely **not** a good solution. The English writing system is notoriously inconsistent, and there already exist a variety of other tools that account for all of the lexical (word-specific) idiosyncracies in deriving the IPA-form from the orthographic form. For many Indigenous languages, the writing system is sufficiently close to the spoken form that `g2p` is a very appropriate solution. In the following sections, I'll describe some common problems when writing rules, and how to fix them.

### Rule Ordering

> The order of your rules in `g2p` really matters! This is because some rules can either create or remove the context for other rules to apply. In linguistics, these rule ordering patterns are usually talked about as either [feeding, bleeding, counter-feeding, or counter-bleeding](https://linguistics.stackexchange.com/questions/6084/whats-the-difference-between-counterbleeding-bleeding-and-feeding) relationships. There are potentially valid reasons to want to encode any of these types of relationships in your rules. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**The order of your rules in `g2p` really matters**! This is because some rules can either create or remove the context for other rules to apply. In linguistics, these rule ordering patterns are usually talked about as either [feeding, bleeding, counter-feeding, or counter-bleeding](https://linguistics.stackexchange.com/questions/6084/whats-the-difference-between-counterbleeding-bleeding-and-feeding) relationships. There are potentially valid reasons to want to encode any of these types of relationships in your rules. 
```

I'm suggesting bolding here, because I didn't understand this, and it hurt me :(

I would even put this in the "basic" tutorial, rather than the "deep-dive" tutorial.

> To illustrate a possible problem, let's consider a `g2p` mapping for language that converts 'a̱' to 'ə' and 'a' to 'æ'. 'a̱' is a sequence of a normal a followed by a combining macron below (\u0331). Because \u0331 ('a̱') is easily confusable with \u0332 ('a̲'), in order to follow the rule of thumb for [Unicode escape sequences](#unicode-escape-sequences), I'll write the rules as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To illustrate a possible problem, let's consider a `g2p` mapping for language that converts 'a̱' to /ə/ and 'a' to /æ/. 'a̱' is a sequence of a normal a followed by a combining macron below (\u0331). Because \u0331 ('a̱') is easily confusable with \u0332 ('a̲'), in order to follow the rule of thumb for [Unicode escape sequences](#unicode-escape-sequences), I'll write the rules as follows:
```

Author: This is my linguist brain here, because /x/ denotes a phoneme whereas 'x' would be just s graph. Whichever decision we choose here will probably be confusing to someone..

| in | out |
|---|---|
| a | æ |
| a\u0331 | ə |

> Now, assuming an input to this mapping of 'a̱' (a\u0331), we would get 'æ̱' (æ\u0331) instead of 'ə'. Why is that? Because the first rule applies and turns 'a' into 'æ' before the second rule has a chance to apply. This is called a 'bleeding' relationship. In order to avoid it, we would need to write our rules as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, assuming an input to this mapping of 'a̱' (a\u0331), we would get 'æ̱' (æ\u0331) instead of 'ə'. Why is that? Because the first rule applies and turns 'a' into 'æ' before the second rule has a chance to apply. This is called a *bleeding* relationship. In order to avoid it, we would need to write our rules as follows:
```

| in | out |
|---|---|
| a\u0331 | ə |
| a | æ |

> With this ordering, our input of 'a̱' (a\u0331) would turn into 'ə' as we expect, and our input of 'a' would turn into æ also as expected. Try it out on the [G2P Studio](https://g2p-studio.herokuapp.com) if you don't believe me!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With this ordering, our input of 'a̱' (a\u0331) would turn into /ə/ as we expect, and our input of 'a' would turn into /æ/ also as expected. Try it out on the [G2P Studio](https://g2p-studio.herokuapp.com) if you don't believe me!
```

### Unicode Escape Sequences

> Sometimes you need rules to convert from characters that either don't render very well, or render in a confusing way. In those cases, you can alternatively use [Unicode escape sequences](https://www.rapidtables.com/code/text/unicode-characters.html). For example, maybe you want to write a rule that converts the standard ASCII 'g' to the strict IPA Unicode /ɡ/. As you can likely see on your browser, these characters look very similar, but they're not! The ASCII 'g' is U+0067 and the strict IPA 'ɡ' is U+0261. So, you can write a rule as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes you need rules to convert from characters that either don't render very well, or render in a confusing way. In those cases, you can use [Unicode escape sequences](https://www.rapidtables.com/code/text/unicode-characters.html). For example, maybe you want to write a rule that converts the standard ASCII 'g' to the strict IPA Unicode /ɡ/. As you can likely see in your browser, these characters look very similar, but they're not the same character! The ASCII 'g' is U+0067 and the strict IPA 'ɡ' is U+0261. So, you can write a rule as follows:
```

| in | out |
|---|---|

> | \u0067 | \u0261 |

Reviewer: Maybe note the difference between Unicode "U+" notation and the (Python string?) `\uXXXX` notation?

or using [JSON](https://www.json.org/json-en.html):

```json
[
    {

>         "in": "\u0067",

Reviewer: How do I find the `\uXXXX` notation for the character I want?

        "out": "\u0261"
    }
]
```

This is also helpful when you need to write rules between combining characters or other confusable characters. The **rule of thumb** is, if your rules are clearer using Unicode escape sequences, do it! Otherwise, just use the normal character in place.

### Special settings for your mapping configuration

You can add extra settings to your configuration file to change the way that `g2p` interprets your mappings. Below is a list of possible settings and their use. All of the settings keys below must be declared for each individual mapping in your `config.yaml` and must be declared on the same level as all of the other keys (`language_name`, `in_lang`, `out_lang` etc). These settings can also be set in the `G2P Studio` instead of in a `config.yml` file.

> ##### `as_is` (default: true)

Reviewer: Lol. I have OPINIONS on this! 😂 (expect a PR to the g2p repository soon)

> ##### `escape_special` (default: False)

Reviewer: I also have opinions on the name and setting of this rule.

Maybe something like:

```yaml
# option 1
interpret-backslashes-as: backslashes
# option 2
interpret-backslashes-as: regular-expression-escapes
```

While more verbose, I think this makes the options more obvious.

Author: Hm, yes, here's another one similar to the `as_is` refactor. Thing is, escape_special will also *add* backslashes. like, take this conversion table for Tsilhqot'in Doulos (I know, why would anybody do this, but it's true, it's a thing):

|     |    | 
|-----|----| 
| @   | ŝ | 
| #   | ŵ | 
| ^ | ẑ | 
| &   | ɨ  | 
| /   | ʔ  | 

So, `escape_special` set to true would turn ^ into \\^ for example.

Reviewer: Haha, maybe I still don't entirely understand exactly what `escape_special` does 😅

> As described in the section on [regular expressions](#regular-expressions), you can define rules using 'special' characters. By default, these characters are interpreted as 'special', but if you want all special characters in your mapping to be interpreted as their actual characters, you can set `escape_special: true`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As I will describe later in the section on [regular expressions](#regular-expressions), you can define rules using 'special' characters. By default, these characters are interpreted as 'special', but if you want all special characters in your mapping to be interpreted as their actual characters, you can set `escape_special: true`.
```

What is the listing of special characters?

---

What's an example of needing to set this to `true` and what's an example of needing to set this to `false`?

> If you've never heard of Unicode normalization don't worry, you're not alone! But, for writing rules and mappings using `g2p`, there can be some surprising 'gotcha' moments if you don't choose the right normalization strategy. 

Reviewer: Which form should I use? (I think you said NFD is the "correct" form to use within the g2p/readalongs universe, but please write this explicitly!)

Author: Yes, I was deliberately hand-wavy here. Ideally we would support either of them, but as we saw in the bugs you had with readalongs, there's something expecting NFD in readalongs that needs to be rooted out.

The basic gist of the problem is that there can be multiple ways to write the *same* character in Unicode, depending on whether you use 'combining characters' to type or not. For example, on some keyboards, you might type 'é' by writing an e first and then another keystroke to type the acute accent that sits above it. The Unicode representation for this would be \u0065 (e) followed by \u0301 (a combining acute accent), however there is an entirely separate Unicode code point that has these two characters *pre-composed* (\u00e9). 

> Many fonts will render these two different representations identically and it can be really difficult and confounding as a user if both appear in the same text. Often times find/replace won't work and frustrating things like that. Luckily, there is a standard for normalizing these differences so that all instances of sequences like \u0065\u0301 would be (NF)Composed into \u00e9, or the opposite direction where all instances of \u00e9 would be (NF)Decomposed into \u0065\u0301. For a more in-depth conversation on this, check out [this blog article](https://withblue.ink/2019/03/11/why-you-need-to-normalize-unicode-strings.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many fonts will render these two different representations identically and it can be really difficult and confounding as a user if both appear in the same text. This causes problems, like text that looks identical will not appear in "find & replace" or search engines will not find the text that you're looking for, even though something that _looks_ identical exists. Luckily, there is a standard for normalizing these differences so that all instances of sequences like \u0065\u0301 would be (NF)Composed into \u00e9, or the opposite direction where all instances of \u00e9 would be (NF)Decomposed into \u0065\u0301. For a more in-depth conversation on this, check out [this blog article](https://withblue.ink/2019/03/11/why-you-need-to-normalize-unicode-strings.html).
```

Also, as with most things Unicode, I have MANY opinions. Feel free to steal my “phở” example from here: https://eddieantonio.ca/unicode-es6/#/7 (phở can be written as 3 characters, 4 characters, or 5 characters, all rendered identically 🙃 )

Author: ok cool! that's a great example. I'll add a screenshot and link. thanks!

    out_delimiter: "|"   # <------- Add your delimiter here
```

> ##### `reverse` (default: false)

Reviewer: Is the more appropriate word for this "invert", as in the [inverse function](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inverse_function)?

Author: Yes that would be more accurate, but then we have to refactor similar to how you did with `as-is`. I'm not sure we should do that now...I mean, I feel like `reverse` is still transparent enough?

| kw | kʷ |
| k | kʲ |

Let's say the intended output here is that whenever we get a `kw` as an input, we get `kʷ` and whenever we get `k` we get `kʲ`. Ordered in the way they are defined, an input of `kw` will produce `kʲʷ` and ordered the other way, an input of `kw` will produce `kʲw`. Neither of these are correct though! So, how do we solve this? There is a setting called `prevent_feeding` which, if set to true, will prevent the output of one rule from being processed by any subsequent rule. As described in the [rule ordering section](#rule-ordering) the process when one rule provides the context for another rule to apply is called 'feeding'. And so this setting is named `prevent_feeding` because it prevents that from happening. Note, setting `prevent_feeding: true` for your whole mapping will do this for every rule. If you just want to prevent feeding for one particular rule, you can write your rules in JSON and add the key to the specific rule you want to prevent feeding for.

> Prevent feeding for single rule (in JSON rule mapping file):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prevent feeding for a single rule (in JSON rule mapping file):
```

    prevent_feeding: true   # <------- Add this
```

### Defining sets of characters

> Some rules are written with repeating sets of characters that can be tedious to write out. As a result, we might want to define certain sets of re-usable characters using a *variable* name. These can be written using special types of mapping files in `g2p`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some rules are written with repeating sets of characters that can be tedious to write out. As a result, we might want to define certain sets of reusable characters using a *variable* name. These can be written using special types of mapping files in `g2p`.
```

Aparently your copyeditors _hate_ hyphens!

Author: haha I guess so!

### Regular Expressions

> [Regular expressions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Regular_expression) are used ubiquitously in programming to define certain search patterns in text. In fact, this is how `g2p` rules work! They eventually get compiled into a regular expression too. For the most part, you can add regular expression syntax to your rules. So, suppose you wanted to write a rule that deleted word-final 's', you could write the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Regular expressions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Regular_expression) are used ubiquitously in programming to define certain search patterns in text. In fact, this is how `g2p` rules work! They eventually get converted into a regular expression too. For the most part, you can add regular expression syntax to your rules. So, suppose you wanted to write a rule that deleted word-final 's', you could write the following:
```

Author: I don't really care about changing this, but isn't [compiled](https://docs.python.org/3/library/re.html#re-objects:~:text=Compiled%20regular%20expression%20objects%20support%20the%20following%20methods%20and%20attributes) more accurate here?

Reviewer 2: Mild vote for keeping the word compiled, but I'm happy with either.

Author: Unless @eddieantonio has strong feelings about this (if so, please enlighten me!) I will keep it as-is.

Reviewer 3: I think I almost changed it away from compiled too. Compiled is more accurate, but also I don't think the level of accuracy is necessary or outweighs how comprehensive "converted" is

Reviewer: "compiled" is definitely more accurate, and perhaps can be understood by people who are unaware of what compiling is. But "converted" is just a simpler, less technical term that I think will be understood instantly. I have a slight preference for "converted" in this context, but feel free to leave it as "compiled"! 😂

| in | out | context_before | context_after |
|---|---|---|---|

> | s |  | \S | \s\|$ |

Reviewer: Does this support `\b` instead of `\s|$`?

Author: yes, but we had a problem in readalongs with it, because \b gives false positives for some orthographies, so I'm hesitant about showing examples with it.

As you can see [in this handy regular expression cheatsheet](https://cheatography.com/davechild/cheat-sheets/regular-expressions/) our rule turns 's' into nothing if it is preceded by \S (not white space) and followed by either \s (white space) or $ (end of the text).

Note: There are some 'gotchas' with writing regular expressions using g2p. This is a technical note, but if you're writing some complicated regular expressions and they're not working, don't hesitate to [raise an issue](https://github.com/roedoejet/g2p/issues/new/choose). For example there are some active issues around edge cases where regular expressions and `g2p`'s custom [syntax for indices](#using-specific-indices) don't play nice together.

### Using specific indices

> Even people familiar with using `g2p` might not be aware that one of its main features is that it preserves indices between input and output segments. Meaning that when we convert from something like 'kæt' to 'kʰæt' as in the first example, `g2p` knows that it's the 'k' that turned into the 'k' and 'ʰ' as seen below.

Reviewer: 😂

{% picture k-to-kh.png %}

> The default interpretation of rule indices by `g2p` is that it zips up the characters between the input and the output of a rule until it reaches the end of either one, then it glombs on any remaining characters the last character of the shorter one (whether that's the input or output). For example, compare the following examples where 'abc' is converted to 'ab' and glombs the excess input character onto the last output character:

Reviewer: I'm _really_ confused by this paragraph! I read it and re-read it multiple times and I'm still not sure I understand it, including the figure!

Author: OK! I will try and re-word this then.

{% picture abc-ab.png %}

and where 'ab' is converted to 'abc' and glombs the excess output character onto the last input character:

{% picture ab-abc.png %}

But what if - for some silly and imaginary reason - we want to show that it was actually 'a' that turned into 'c', and 'b' that turned into 'ab'? Well, we can use special `g2p` syntax for explicitly writing these indices. Instead of, 

| in | out | context_before | context_after |
|---|---|---|---|
| ab | abc | |  |

we can write

| in | out | context_before | context_after |
|---|---|---|---|
| a{1}b{2} | ab{2}c{1} | |  |

Now, our indices will reflect our imaginary need to index 'a' with 'c' and 'b' with 'ab':

{% picture ab-abc-i.png %}

> Using the explicit indices syntax will break up your rule into a number of smaller rules that apply the same defaults of above but to explicit sets of characters. You must use curly brackets, but the choice of character you put inside is arbitrary - it just has to match on both sides. By convention, we use natural numbers. This will match all the characters to the left of each pair of curly brackets on the input with the matching index on the output. So here, 'a' is matched with 'c' and 'b' is matched with 'ab'.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the explicit indices syntax will break up your rule into a number of smaller rules that apply the same defaults of above but to explicit sets of characters. You **must** use curly brackets, but the choice of character you put inside is arbitrary — it just has to match on both sides. By convention, we use natural numbers. This will match all the characters to the left of each pair of curly brackets on the input with the matching index on the output. So here, 'a' is matched with 'c' and 'b' is matched with 'ab'.
```

These can get fairly complicated, so we recommend only using this functionality either for demonstration purposes, or for specific applications which require the preservation of indices.

> ## Adding a 'pre-processing' mapping

Reviewer: I would make "adding a pre-processing" mapping its own, standalone blog post. Something like "Making language text consistent with g2p pre-processing mappings" and it could link to Fineen's `convertextract` post!

> It's often not sufficient to just write a mapping between the characters in a language's orthography and the IPA. As seen in [use case #2](#use-case-2-a-language-with-multiple-writing-systems) and [use case #3](#use-case-3-converting-from-legacy-writing-systems), real-world text input is pretty messy, and if we want ReadAlongs or Convertextract - or any other tool that uses `g2p` - to work properly, we need to account for as much of that messiness as possible. Generally speaking, solving this kind of messiness is usually called 'Text Normalization'. This 'normalization' can either be about ensuring that the same Unicode characters are used consistently, or it can also be about converting symbols into their pronounced form, like & or 123. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's often not sufficient to just write a mapping between the characters in a language's orthography and the IPA. As seen in [use case #2](#use-case-2-a-language-with-multiple-writing-systems) and [use case #3](#use-case-3-converting-from-legacy-writing-systems), real-world text input is pretty messy, and if we want ReadAlongs or Convertextract - or any other tool that uses `g2p` - to work properly, we need to account for as much of that messiness as possible. Generally speaking, solving this kind of messiness is usually called 'Text Normalization'.[^n] This 'normalization' can either be about ensuring that the same Unicode characters are used consistently, or it can also be about converting symbols into their pronounced form, like & or 123. 

[^n]: not to be confused with Unicode Normalization, which is different usage of the same term!
```

> For example, maybe your language uses underlines in its orthography. There are two commonly confusable Unicode characters here: \u0331 and \u0332, and they look almost identical (cf. g̱ ('\u0331') vs g̲ (\u0332)). So, let's 'normalize' here to \u0331.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, maybe your language uses underlines in its orthography. There are two commonly confusable Unicode characters here: U+0331 COMBING MACRON BELOW and U+0332 COMBINING LOW LINE, and they look almost identical (cf. g̱ (U+0331) vs g̲ (U+0332)). So, let's 'normalize' to consistently use U+0331.
```

| in | out | context_before | context_after |
|---|---|---|---|
| \u0332 | \u0331 | |  |

Second, maybe we have a text that has a lot of puncutation like '&' in it. We could write a mapping here for that as well (example in Danish):

| in | out | context_before | context_after |
|---|---|---|---|
| & | og | |  |

> How do we link this up with the rest of our mappings? We recommend calling these mappings `<yourlang>-norm`. When you run `g2p update`, `g2p` creates a [directed graph](https://mathinsight.org/definition/directed_graph#:~:text=A%20directed%20graph%20is%20graph,digraph%20or%20a%20directed%20network.) between all possible mappings. Consider we have a `g2p` pipeline from 'dan' to 'eng-arpabet' that goes through the `g2p` graph like so, 'dan' → 'dan-ipa' → 'eng-ipa' → 'eng-arpabet'. We basically want to add one more conversion along this path that does this normalization step. So, we [configure a mapping](#mapping-configuration) for a mapping from 'dan' → 'dan-norm' containing our normalizations, then we rename the 'dan' → 'dan-ipa' mapping to 'dan-norm' → 'dan-ipa'. Then, we `g2p update` and the next time we run a mapping from 'dan' → 'eng-arpabet', it will pass through the normalization mapping too.

Reviewer: `g2p update` kind of comes out of nowhere; it's not until "advanced usage" that installing `g2p` in the command line is explained, or why you'd want to do that in the first place.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
How do we link this up with the rest of our mappings? We recommend calling these mappings `<yourlang>-norm`. When you run `g2p update`, `g2p` creates a [directed graph](https://mathinsight.org/definition/directed_graph#:~:text=A%20directed%20graph%20is%20graph,digraph%20or%20a%20directed%20network.) between all possible mappings. Consider we have a `g2p` pipeline from 'dan' to 'eng-arpabet' that goes through the `g2p` graph like so, 'dan' → 'dan-ipa' → 'eng-ipa' → 'eng-arpabet'. We basically want to add one more conversion along this path that does this normalization step. So, we [configure a mapping](#mapping-configuration) for a mapping from 'dan' → 'dan-norm' containing our normalizations, then we rename the existing mapping to 'dan-norm' → 'dan-ipa'. Then, we `g2p update` and the next time we run a mapping from 'dan' → 'eng-arpabet', it will pass through the normalization mapping too.
```

Reviewer: It would also be nice to visualize  the full progression, kind of like this:

| dan | dan-norm | dan-ipa | eng-ipa | eng-arpabet |
| - |-|-|-|-|
| historie & afkolinsering | historie og afkolinsering | histɔʁiɛ ɔ æfkɔlinsɛʁiŋ | histɔʒiɛ ɔ æfkɔlinsɛʒiŋ| HH IY S T AO ZH IY EH  AO  AE F K AO L IY N S EH ZH IY NG |

====

> ***PROPOSED END OF SECOND POST***

Reviewer: I like having "Applications of g2p" be its own post! 👍

====

## Applications

> There are number of different software tools that are already making use of `g2p`. For general purpose use in Python, have a look at [this section](#advanced-use-in-python). G2P is also used extensively in the [ReadAlongs](#readalongs) project for creating interactive audio/text documents and in [Convertextract](#convertextract), a tool for going `g2p` transformations in Microsoft Office documents while preserving the original document formatting.

Reviewer 2: "for going" -> "for doing"

### ReadAlongs

> ReadAlongs is an exploratory research project from the [National Research Council's Indigenous Language Technology Project](https://nrc.canada.ca/en/research-development/research-collaboration/programs/canadian-indigenous-languages-technology-project). The central goal of the project is to find a way to align audio and text for languages without requiring *any* training data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ReadAlongs is an exploratory research project from the [National Research Council's Indigenous Language Technology Project](https://nrc.canada.ca/en/research-development/research-collaboration/programs/canadian-indigenous-languages-technology-project).
```

This is explained in layterms later, so I think this sentence is redundant.

> Language revitalization communities have potentially many different recordings of language and some associated text, but mobilizing these materials into something that is educationally useful can be time-consuming. It's also tough from the learner's perspective to try and follow along the text (maybe a Word Document) just by simply playing the audio. It's easy to get lost in the recording quickly, and from personal experience, trying to do that usually involves a lot of frustrating rewinding.

Reviewer 2: "time-consuming" -> "time consuming"

Then, we use the very cool Python library [PanPhon](https://github.com/dmort27/panphon) to figure out the mapping between the IPA characters in Mohawk and their *closest* IPA equivalents in English. We call this mapping a "Kanyen'kéha IPA to English IPA" mapping. If you have already created your mapping between the orthography and the IPA, you can generate this "Kanyen'kéha IPA to English IPA" using the `g2p` command line. 

Then, we convert the ReadAlong in question from its original orthographic form all the way to English IPA (well, actually to 'Arpabet' which is an ASCII-compliant phonetic transcription standard that the alignment model understands).

Then, after we "do the alignment" (ie figure out which parts of the audio correspond to which part of the text), ReadAlongs puts it all back together again and ta-da! There is your aligned audio and text!

#### Generate your mapping between your language's IPA and English IPA

> After [installing](#installation) `g2p` and once you have made your mapping, update `g2p` by running `g2p update`. Then, you can run `g2p generate-mapping <input-code> --ipa`. So in our example for Kanyen'kéha (moh) we would run 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After [installing](#installation) `g2p` and once you have made your mapping, update `g2p` by running `g2p update`. When you add or modify any mapping, `g2p` doesn't actually see it yet. `g2p update` is what scans all the mappings and makes them available to `g2p`. Then, you can run `g2p generate-mapping <input-code> --ipa`. So in our example for Kanyen'kéha (moh) we would run 
```

It's not clear here, and it took an embarrassingly long time for it to get clear in my own mind, what `g2p update` does exactly. It's explained in more details later, but this sentence should help set the reader on the right track for what it does.

Author: very fair! thanks for this

```bash
g2p generate-mapping moh --ipa
```

> That will automatically generate a mapping in `g2p/mappings/langs/generated` - do not edit this file or its configuration unless you really know what you're doing, because it will get overwritten. After generation, you can run `g2p update` and your mapping will be [usable](#usage) within `g2p`!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
That will automatically generate a moh-ipa to eng-ipa mapping in `g2p/mappings/langs/generated` - do not edit this file or its configuration unless you really know what you're doing, because it will get overwritten. After generation, you can run `g2p update` again and your mapping will be [usable](#usage) within `g2p`!
```
My suggestion adds the word "again" to make it even more clear that you have to do it both before *and* after running generate-mapping.

My suggestion also adds explicitly what mapping is generated. It took me embarrassingly long to understand that "update" basically compiled everything, while "generate-mapping" just generated the specified lang-ipa -> eng-ipa mapping. So I would make it explicit.

You can recreate this type of animation using the G2P studio by selecting the French (`fra`) to English Arpabet (`eng-arpabet`) mapping, choosing 'animate' and then typing your text in the input area as seen below:

{% picture g2p-animate.png %}

#### What can you do with your aligned audio/text?

ReadAlongs exports to a variety of formats, including epub (for e-readers), [Praat](https://www.fon.hum.uva.nl/praat/) TextGrids, [ELAN](https://archive.mpi.nl/tla/elan) files, various subtitle formats, and an embeddable web component for your website. This project is still *very* unstable though, and it is **not** yet recommended to use it in production.

Below is an example of the embeddable web component in Danish.

{% include readalong.html text="/assets/ras/output.xml" alignment="/assets/ras/output.smil" audio="/assets/ras/output.wav" %}

### Convertextract

Convertextract is a tool that lets you use `g2p` mappings to convert text inside a variety of different documents. Have a look at the [convertextract repo readme](https://github.com/roedoejet/convertextract) or at Fineen Davis' [blog post]({{ "convertextract-app" | absolute_url }}) about the Convertextract GUI.

> ### Advanced: use in Python

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Advanced: use in Python and the command line
```

#### Installation

We recommend installing `g2p` using [pip](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pip_(package_manager)):

```python
pip install g2p
```

> If you are going to be creating your own mapping or editing `g2p` in any way, you must first fork and clone `g2p`:

Reviewer 2: I would say a sentence about what forking means. Or else at the top of the blog post that includes this, say that knowing how to fork a GitHub project is a pre-requisite.

```suggestion
If you are going to be creating your own mapping or editing `g2p` in any way, you must first fork `g2p` by going to [https://github.com/roedoejet/g2p](https://github.com/roedoejet/g2p) and forking the project to your own GitHub space.

Once you've forked `g2p`, clone your own fork:
```

```bash
git clone https://github.com/YourGitHubUsername/g2p.git
```

and then do an *editable* pip installation:

```bash
cd g2p && pip install -e .
```

#### Usage

Using `g2p` within Python can be done, either programatically using the `make_g2p` function:

```python
>>> from g2p import make_g2p
>>> transducer = make_g2p('dan', 'eng-arpabet')
>>> transducer('hej').output_string
'HH EH Y'
```

#### Command Line Interface

You can also use `g2p` from the command line. The basic command for conversions is:

```bash
g2p convert <input_text> <in_lang> <out_lang>
```

So in practice:

```bash
$ g2p convert hej dan eng-arpabet
HH EH YY
```

> ## Advanced: contributing your rules to the main `g2p` library

Reviewer: I think this should be its own, standalone post: "Tutorial: How to contribute new rules to `g2p`". I know I would have benefited from it a few weeks ago! 😂 

If you'd like, you can assign me to flesh-out this post. If you like this idea, I would cut this section out of the g2p post, and place it in `_drafts/tutorial-contributing-g2p-rules`.  If we publish this before October, it could be a nice tutorial for Hacktoberfest!

Author: ooo, I like the idea about Hactoberfest! and thanks, it would be great to have some help on that post, especially since it's fresh for you 😄

Reviewer: I'd be glad to! Again, just dump what you have here in `_drafts/` and I can pick it up!

> You've written some cool rules and you want to contribute, that's awesome! There are lots of benefits to contributing your mapping to `g2p`. First of all, once your mapping is accepted, you'll have it available and live on [G2P Studio](https://g2p-studio.herokuapp.com). Second, once the next version of `g2p` is release with your mapping, it will be automatically built in to the [Convertextract](#convertextract) library. Third, if your mapping is between a language's writing system and the IPA, you can also get ReadAlongs support for your language.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You've written some cool rules and you want to contribute, that's awesome! There are lots of benefits to contributing your mapping to `g2p`. First of all, once your mapping is accepted, you'll have it available and live on [G2P Studio](https://g2p-studio.herokuapp.com). Second, once the next version of `g2p` is released with your mapping, it will be automatically built in to the [Convertextract](#convertextract) library. Third, if your mapping is between a language's writing system and the IPA, you can also get ReadAlongs support for your language.
```
typo: release->released

So, you write your mapping once, and you get three things for free (G2P studio, convertextract and readalongs). Here's how:

> 1. Fork g2p

Reviewer: Please add a link on where/how to fork `g2p`

2. Add a folder for your language using the appropriate [ISO 639.3 code](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_ISO_639-3_codes) to `g2p/mappings/langs`

> 3. Add a config.yaml file as described [here](#mapping-configuration)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Add a config.yaml file as described [here](#mapping-configuration)
```
```suggestion
3. Add a `config.yaml` file as described [here](#mapping-configuration)
```

4. Add your mapping in that same folder (`g2p/mappings/langs/<yourlang>`)

> 5. If your mapping is for an IPA mapping, you can optionally [generate the mapping](#generate-your-mapping-between-your-languages-ipa-and-english-ipa) between your language and English IPA.

Reviewer 2: you have to run `g2p update` before and after this step, not just after.

Author: good point, thanks @joanise !

6. Run `g2p update` to add your mapping to `g2p`
7. Add some test data to `g2p/tests/public/data`. 
8. Submit your changes by creating a [pull request](https://github.com/roedoejet/g2p/compare)

> That's it! Either myself, or somebody else will review the changes, and you will get credit for those mappings and be added to the [list of contributors](https://github.com/roedoejet/g2p/graphs/contributors)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, either myself, or somebody else will review the changes, and you will get credit for those mappings and be added to the [list of contributors](https://github.com/roedoejet/g2p/graphs/contributors)
```

"That's it" might sound like this is a trivial process, when I know firsthand that it can be quite involved!

> ### Adding tests

Reviewer: Perhaps motivate _why_ the user should write tests. Me, being the indoctrinated software engineering MSc. consider it a good practice to write tests first to have a better handle on what problem you're trying to solve by having a clear example, and then solving it 😄

Author: Right, in practise, this is what I do when making new mappings, I guess I can re-arrange the order of the steps.

> This is done by adding either a CSV/TSV/PSV file with 4 columns. The first is the input language code, the second is the output language code, the third is the input and the fourth is the asserted output of that mapping and input. Here is an example between French (fra) and French IPA (fra-ipa) asserting that 'manger' results in 'mɑ̃ʒe':

Reviewer: Where do you make this file?
